BIOS is the basic input output system; and it is a read only memory which is present on your system. And it ensures that your system boots correctly and it also ensures that the operating system gets loaded. So, the area of the RAM, essentially all memory addresses below 960 KB is typically not used in modern day systems. While the area from 960 to 1 MB that is 960 KB to 1 MB is used by the BIOS and only used during the booting of the system.

when you boot your laptop or your desktop PC, which is an Intel system or an AMD system, the BIOS will expect several things like it will expect that there is a keyboard which is connected to your system and the keyboard is present or rather the keyboard is accessible from the address range 60 to 6F. In IO mapped IO addressing, was the limited amount of address range that was permitted. In order to extend this, the memory mapped IO. In this particular memory mapped IO, hardware devices would then connect or would be then mapped into regions in the memory addressing itself. So, as we have seen before, the RAM or the random access memory of the system would be addressed from the location 0 and extend upwards until the end of the RAM.

plug and play devices do not have any fixed address location as we have seen for things like the keyboard or VGA, memory and so on. But rather, when the system boots and when the BIOS begins to execute, the BIOS will then detect the presence of some particular hardware in the system. For instance, the BIOS would detect that the system has a network card present; it would then ask the network card as to how much memory it requires and what type of memory it requires, whether it is a IO memory or a memory address. So, based on this, the BIOS will then allocate a portion of memory for that particular network card.

Now an important device which connects to the front side bus is known as the North Bridge or the chip set. So, the North Bridge would interface with the memory through what is known as the memory bus; and it also interfaces with the PCI bus. So, on the PCI bus you could have several devices like the Ethernet controller, USB controller. And the USB controller could have many USB devices, which you see at the front or the back of your desktop. Now as you would notice over here, the USB devices are connected in a tree like structure.

Now the PCI bus also has a hierarchy type of structure; and each bus for instance, in this case, PCI bus 0 which is a closest to the north bridge. And you have in this way a PCI bus 1, which is connected to the north bridge through the PCI bus 0. So, the interface between bus 0 and bus 1 is through a PCI to PCI bridge. In addition to this, there is what is known as the south bridge and this is south bridge interfaces with the PCI bus or you could have a special protocol or a special connection with the north bridge which is known as the DMI bus.

in the south bridge, various legacy devices like the PS 2 devices, keyboard, mouse, PC speaker, and so on are connected.

this was a 16 bit microprocessor which had a 20 bit external address bus. And therefore, could address up to 1 MB of memory. So, how did we get this 1 MB is essentially 2 power 20, so that 2 power 20 is 1 MB. take the segment base that is one of the segment registers which forms the base, it could left shift it by four and add an offset. For instance, in order to fetch one instruction from the memory into the processor, the CS register would be used. So, CS register would be the base for the code segment. It would be left shift it by 4. And the IP of the instruction pointer would be added to that. In this way, even though there are the registers used are 16 bit, so each of this registers CS and IP are 16 bit, still by shifting it by 4 bits and adding the IP. It was possible to address 2 power 20 memory locations.
