Whenever you press the reset button on the board, it actually sends reset signal. So, that causes a microcontroller or processor to undergo a reset. Otherwise, when you give power to the board, so it actually undergoes power on reset.

So, the first thing what happens when you reset the processor is the PC, that is the program counter is loaded with a value zero. Next, Then processor reads the value @ memory location zero into MSP. So, the memory location 0 actually belongs to a flash memory, or ROM memory, a program memory. So, it reads the value which is stored in this location into MSP. So, MSP is equal to value at this location. It's a 32 bit value actually. MSP is a main stack pointer of the processor, it's a register, a 32 bit register. So, that means the processor first initializes the stack pointer.

After that, processor reads the value at memory location 0x0000_0004 into PC. That value is address of the reset handler. So, that means the address of the reset handler is put into PC. That means, PC jumps to the reset handler now. Now, a reset handler is just a C or assembly function written by you to carry out any initializations required. After that, from reset handler you call your main function of the application. So, that's how control reaches to your main function all the way from resetting the processor.

Whenever processor undergoes reset, it first fetches the main stack pointer value from the vector table and then it jumps to the reset handler. And the reset handler address is also available in the vector table. The reset handler is usually implemented in the startup file of your project. Job of the reset handler is to do some early initialization and after that, it calls the user program that is the main function of the project.  Usually, reset handler does initialization of data section initialization, BSS section initialization, initialization of a standard 'C' library if it is used. Finally, it calls the user program that is the main function.Without doing all these initialization you cannot call the main function, the user code may not work properly.
