Four types of cards:

Secure Digital Standard Capacity (SDSC)
Secure Digital High Capacity (SDHC)
The Secure Digital eXtended Capacity (SDXC)
Secure Digital Ultra Capacity (SDUC)

Communication over the SD bus is based on command and data bit streams that are initiated by a start bit and terminated by a stop bit.

Command : a command is a token that starts an operation. A command is sent from the host either to a single card (addressed command) or to all connected cards (broadcast command). A command is transferred serially on the CMD line.

Response : a response is a token that is sent from an addressed card, or (synchronously) from all connected cards, to the hosts as an answer to a previously received command. A response is transferred serially on the CMD line.

Data : data can be transferred from the card to the host or vice versa. Data is transferred via the data lines.

figure 3.1 SD card bus system topology

look 4.7.2 command format and figure 3.7 command token format 

Response tokens have one of four coding schemes, depending on their content. The token length is either 48 or 136 bits. The CRC protection algorithm for block data is a 16-bit CCITT polynomial.

figure 3.8 response token format

figure 3-4 no response and no data operation

( check 2- system features )

The SD Memory Card system defines three communication protocols: SD, SPI and UHS-II. The host 
system can choose one of these modes. The card detects which mode is requested by the host just after 
the power up. Common SD bus signals for multiple card slots are not recommended. A single SD bus 
should connect a single removable SD card.

In default speed, the SD Memory Card bus has a single master (application); multiple slaves (cards), 
synchronous star topology (refer to Figure 3-1). In high speed and UHS-I, the SD Memory Card bus has 
a single master (application) single slave (card), synchronous point to point topology. Clock, power and 
ground signals are common to all cards. Command (CMD) and data (DAT0 - DAT3) signals are dedicated 
to each card providing continues point to point connection to all the cards.

Note that while DAT1 to DAT3 are not in use, the related Host's DAT lines should be
in tri-state (input mode). For SDIO cards DAT1 and DAT2 are used for signaling.

( 3.7 SD Memory Card–Pins and Registers
	 only 3.7.1 SD Bus Pin Assignment
	 only 3.8 ROM Card
	 only 3.9 Ultra High Speed Phase I (UHS-I) Card )

check if uhs-2 supported

Table 3-1 : SD Memory Card Pad Assignment
Table 3-2 : SD Memory Card Registers

