The memory map defines the memory attributes of memory access. The memory attributes available in Cortex®-M processors include the following:
Bufferable: A write to the memory can be carried out by a write buffer while the processor continues to execute the next instruction.
Cacheable: Data obtained from memory read can be copied to a memory cache so that the next time it is accessed the value can be obtained from the cache to speed up the program’s execution.
Executable: The processor is allowed to fetch and execute program code from this memory region. If a memory region (e.g., the peripheral region) does not allow the execution ofprogram codes, it is marked with an XN (eXecute Never) attribute.
Sharable: Data in this memory region could be shared by multiple bus masters. If a memory region is configured with a shareable attribute, then the memory system needs to ensure the coherency of data between the different bus masters.
Transient: When a memory region is marked with this attribute it suggests that the data in this memory region might not be needed to be accessed shortly.

The bufferable attribute can be applied to “Normal memory” and “Device”. For example, a cache memory controller can use this attribute to select between Write-Back and WriteThrough cache policies. If a write is bufferable, and if the cache controller supports the Write-Back cache policy, then the writes are held in the cache unit as dirty data. The bufferable attribute is used to improve performance when the memory system contains wait states. For example, if a write buffer is present, a data write to a bufferable memory region can be carried out in a single clock cycle and, even if the actual transfer needs several clock cycles to be completed on the bus interface (Fig. 6.3), it can still immediately execute the next instruction. Unlike the previous Cortex-M3/M4 processors, there is no internal write buffer in the Cortex-M33 processor. However, write buffers might still be present in system-level components, such as a bus bridge and an external  memory interface.
The cacheability attributes for Normal memory can be further divided into:
• inner cache attributes, and
• outer cache attributes
These cacheability attributes are configurable if the MPU has been implemented. The separation of inner and outer attributes allows a processor to use the inner attributes for built-in cache and the outer attributes for system/L2 cache.

Another new memory attribute feature in the Armv8-M architecture is that Normal memory has a new Transient attribute. If an address region is marked as Transient it means the data within is unlikely to be frequently used. A cache design could, therefore, utilize this information to prioritize transient data for cacheline evictions. A cacheline eviction operation is needed when the processor needs to store a new piece of data into the cache but all of the cache-ways of the corresponding cache index have already been used by older valid data.  In the case of the Cortex-M23 and Cortex-M33 processors, this attribute is not used as (a) there is no data cache support, and (b) the AHB interface does not have any signal for transient indication.

The Sharable memory attribute is required in systems with multiple processors and multiple cache units with cache coherency control support (Fig. 6.4). When data access is indicated as Sharable, the cache controller needs to ensure that the value is coherent with the other cache units. This is necessary because the value could have been cached and modified by another processor.

Peripherals should be defined as a “Device” memory type. The Device attributes for Armv8-M have been changed when compared with that in the previous architecture. The Device type now has several subcategories which are defined using the following three characteristics:
• Gathering—the bus infrastructure is allowed to merge multiple transfers
• Reordering—the bus infrastructure is allowed to reorder between different transfers
• Early response—the bus infrastructure is allowed to buffer up write transfers and feedback speculative bus responses to the processor (i.e., bufferable)

The default memory access attributes for each memory region are shown in Table 6.4. By default, all Normal memory regions are defined as Nonshareable, but this can be changed by using an MPU. In single-processor systems, there is no need to change the memory attribute to shareable, but in multicore processor systems with caches, as shown in Fig. 6.4, then there is a need for the shareability attribute.
