One of the most commonly used debug features in most microcontrollers is the
breakpoint feature. In the Cortex-M, the following two types of breakpoint mechanisms are supported:
• Breakpoint instruction BKPT, also known as software breakpoints. You can
insert an unlimited number of BKPT instructions in your application for
debugging (obviously subject to memory size).
• Breakpoint using address comparators in the Flash Patch and Breakpoint Unit
(FPB). The number of hardware comparators is limited. For the Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4, there can be up to eight comparators (only six of them can generate
an instruction address breakpoint).

The breakpoint instruction (BKPT #immed8) is a 16-bit Thumb instruction with
the encoding 0xBExx. The lower 8 bits depend on the immediate data given
following the instruction. When this instruction is executed, it generates a debug
event and can be used to halt the processor core if C_DBGEN is set, or if the debug
monitor is enabled, it can be used to trigger the Debug Monitor exception. Because
the debug monitor is one type of exception with programmable priority, it can
only be used in thread or exception handlers with priority lower than itself. As a
result, if the debug monitor is used for debugging, the BKPT instructions should
not be used in exception handlers such as MonMaskable Interrupt (NMI) or
HardFault.

When the processor is unhalted, or when the debug monitor exception returns, it
is returned to the address of the BKPT instruction, not the address after the BKPT
instruction. This is because in normal use of breakpoint instructions, the BKPT is
used to replace a normal instruction, and when the breakpoint is hit and the debug
action is carried out, the instruction memory is restored to the original instruction,
and the rest of the instruction memory is unaffected.

If the BKPT instruction is executed with C_DEBUGEN ¼ 0 and MON_EN ¼ 0,
it will cause the processor to enter a HardFault exception, with DEBUGEVT in the
Hard Fault Status register (HFSR) set to 1, and BKPT in the Debug Fault Status
register (DFSR) also set to 1.
The FPB unit can be programmed to generate breakpoint events even if the
program memory cannot be altered. However, it is limited to six instruction addresses and two literal addresses.
