let us discuss the third way of doing multiple tasks. That is singularism. So Singularism means that doing two or more different tasks while subjected to these constraints. That is, you are allowed to do only one task at a time and you are not allowed to pre-empt or discontinue the tasks that you are doing until you complete the task. So if you are subjected to these constraint, it means that you are doing your task in a singular fashion.

let us extend our Well-digging example. consider three Well-diggers again assigned a task to dig their respective 100ft deep Well. And let us give them privilege that this time also each one of them is equipped with their own personal well drilling tool. So it means that there is no scarcity of resources available to them. Now, let us impose these constraints on these three well diggers. Only one Well, digger is allowed to dig at a time. And once the Well-digger started digging his well, he cannot pre-empt or discontinue until his well is completely digged. So until the task is complete and only when the first well digger completes his task, then only the next well, digger is allowed to start his task. it simply means that each of these wild diggers are actually doing their task one by one. So through this example, we can conclude that work of all the three well diggers is not in progression. When the well diggers say one was doing the task, the two and third Well, Digger did not even started.

So this example do not show the property of progression. Also, one more point to be noted here is that that whether they have one drilling tool or three, it really don't matter. It won't going to improve or degrade the time taken by all the three well diggers in this example, irrespective of the fact whether you provide them one drilling tool or three or more. So now after discussing all these three scenarios, we can conclude and we can write the following inequality that the time taken to complete the same amount of work in all the three scenarios is represented by this inequality.

The time taken in parallelism is way less than the time taken in Singularism and the time taken in Singularism is less than the time taken in concurrency.

So from this equation you tend to think that concurrency is the worst way of doing task. Then you must be thinking that why do we have concurrency in the first place if it is so worst in the example of concurrency, the well actually waste their time in switching the well-digging tool between them. In the concurrent case, they have to hand over the well digging tool to the next person and the next person again, dig for some time and then hand over the tool to the next person and so on. So doing a handover of the tool itself consumes a lot of time. This handover of the tool was not present in the example of Singularism and the handover of the tool was also completely absent in parallelism.

So it brings us to the conclusion that concurrency don't give you speed. It gives progression, So do not choose concurrency for speed. Choose the concurrency for progression and parallelism gives a speed as well as progression, but it demands hardware resources.
 