When the child joinable thread terminates then which are all other threads it can join? Is it always the parent thread which the child thread can join on termination or it can join any other thread also. So a child joinable thread upon termination can join all those threads which are actually blocked on p thread underscore join API. Then all those threads are said to be waiting for the termination of this child Joinable thread.

So let us suppose that in your multithreaded program you have one of the thread called it as parent thread as usual. Let us suppose that this parent thread creates one child joinable thread. And F is the fork point. Now let us further assume that this child thread creates another thread and let us call that another thread as grandchild thread. So the parent thread after the fork point f will continue to execute its execution flow. The child thread also after the fork point F would continue its own execution flow and the grandchild thread would also do the same. Now let us suppose that the grandchild thread invokes an API thread underscore join and this grandchild thread invokes an API thread Underscore join on the handle of the child thread.

So now the grandchild thread is now waiting for the termination or death of the child thread. Similarly, the parent thread has also invoked an api p thread underscore join on the handle of the child thread. So it means that parent thread is also waiting for the termination of the child thread. So now you can see that there are two join points J1 and J2. Now going further, let us suppose that the child thread has completed its work and it terminates. So as soon as the child thread terminates, it will go to join, which are waiting on its handle. So in this case it is the parent thread as well as grandchild thread. So as soon as the child thread terminates, a signal will be sent to the parent thread as well as grandchild thread and parent and grandchild thread will resume their execution beyond the join points.

So in this case, you can see that any thread can invoke P thread join API for any other joinable thread. And it is not just parent thread which can wait for the termination of child thread. Any thread can wait for the termination of any other joinable thread in the system. here in the system means within the process. In this example, you can see that the grand child is actually waiting for the termination of its parent thread, which is which is child thread C Right. So waiting for the termination of the thread can happen in any order. The parent can wait for the child, the child can wait for a parent or any thread can wait for any other thread. There is no restriction. The only thing that you need to keep in mind is that that the threat should wait for the termination of a joinable thread only. A thread should not wait for the detached thread to join. A detached thread never join any other thread on the join point.
