There are exactly three ways of generating a signal in Linux.

The first way is that raising a signal from OS two operating system. So the first way of generating a signal is the signal that is generated by operating system and thesignal is delivered to a process running in user space. The example of this signal is like Sigint signal, which is generated by the operating system and delivered to the process when control key is pressed. So this is one way of generating a signal and delivering a signal to a process.

The second way of generating a signal is that a signal can be generated by the process itself and it could be delivered by the process A to itself. So this can be achieved using ray system call and we will see that a process can use ray system call in order to generate a signal as well as processing the signal by itself.

And in the third way, a signal can be generated by the process A which is running in user space and the signal could be delivered to another process B, which is running in user space. So sending signal from process A to process B, and this could be done using kill system call.

Let us discuss how the three ways of generating a signals can be implemented. The first way of generating a signal is called signal trapping. A process can trap a signal that is received from the operating system and the process can perform user defined function when this signal is received. So this is called signal trapping, and we have already discussed that not all the signals can be trapped. For example, Sigkill signal cannot be trapped. So let us discuss the implementation that regarding how signals can be trapped and how process can perform its own customized processing.

Now, the second technique of generating a signal is that a process can actually generate and send a signal to itself using raise system call. So the synopsis of the raise system call is pretty simple. It just accepts an argument, which is the signal number. So the moment this raise system call is invoked, a signal number which is specified as this argument will be delivered to this process. And if the process has the signal handler registered against this signal number, then that signal handler will be invoked. The signal denoted by a signal number when raised using raise system call is delivered to the process itself.

( watch lec 45 just to understand practical use case )
