a thread is nothing, but it is the basic unit of execution flow, right? And a process has at least one thread and we call that thread as main thread. So we already know that any program you write, which is an executable program, it has at least one function, and that function is called main. In other words, we say that a program has at least one thread and that thread is a main thread. Your main function runs as a main thread So execution flow is nothing, but it is an independent set of instructions which execute.

A thread runs in the context of a process. So you must have a process P and that process P contains thread. Now it is obvious that a process P has at least one thread and that is called the main thread. So a thread by itself do not exist. For the thread to exist, the process must exist. In other words, process is nothing, but it is just a main thread. So in order to create a thread, you have to create a process first. And a process has at least one thread, which is called a main thread. A thread can create other threads. Other threads can create more, other threads and so on. So there is no limitation or no foundation at all.

The creation of the first thread starts from the main thread. let us suppose that at some point in the main thread, let's say that point is F, the main thread creates another thread called T2. So after the point f, a new independent execution flow is created and that execution flow is nothing but it is the thread T2 right. So there is no limitation. Your main thread can create as many threads as it wants as well as your child thread. T2 can also create as many thread as it wants. For example, let us suppose at point, say F one, which is a point in the execution flow of the thread t2 the thread T2 decides to create more threads. So you can see that at point f one another thread T3 is created. Similarly, thread T3 can also create more threads. There is absolutely no limitation or no foundation as to which thread can create thread. Any thread in your program can create more threads.

The point where a new thread is created is called fork point. So point f and point f one are called fork points. These are the points where a new thread is created by the parent thread. A thread which creates a new thread is called parent thread, whereas a thread which is created is called child thread.
