Bit-banding is the capability to address a single bit of a memory address. This feature is optional, that is the MCU manufacturer may support it or may not support this feature. You have to refer to the reference manual of the microcontroller.

Let's say you have memory of 1KB. The width of the memory array is 1 byte. That means, 1x1024 different locations. That would be 1KB. If the processor wants to a read 1 byte from address 0x2000_0000. The instruction could be a if you are using ARM Cortex MX processor, then we have a instruction called LDRB ( load a byte). Let's say, LDRB R0, R1. R1 is initialized with this address. If we execute this instruction, then 1 byte will be read and it will be loaded into R0. What if you want to read 2 bytes simultaneously. LDRB is byte addressable.This is a byte access. What if you want to read 2 bytes at a time? Then you'd be using the instruction LDRH, where 'H' stands for half word. This is half word addressing. That means, two bytes will be read and it will be stored into the internal register of the processor. And after that, we have instruction a LDR. This is word accessing. We have byte accessing,half word accessing, and word accessing. For this we use the instruction LDRB, for this we use LDRH, and for this we use LDR. What if you want to read only let's say this is a 0th bit and let's say this is the 7th bit of the data. What if you want to read just 4 bits? That's not possible. That is half byte access. Half byte access is not supported atleast in this processor. If you want to read half byte, so first you have to read full byte using LDRB let's say and then you mask out the bits which are not required. That means a lowest possible addressable size is byte.

So, the bit banding is a feature by using which you can address a single bit of the memory location. This memory location has 8 bits, isn't it? By using bit-banding technique, you can address individual bits by using a unique address. That's what we call as a bit addressable feature or bit banding. That means, a unique address will be given to each single bit of the memory location.

Let's say, you have a memory location here of 1 byte and let's say you want to change the 0th bit.This is a 0th bit, and let's say you want to make this bit position as 1. You first you'd be doing LDRB, you'd be first reading a byte. Let's say to R0, from R1 let's say, R1 initialized with this address, this is a byte access.After that, you'd be modifying the 0th bit. You would be using one instruction, let's say ORR instruction or something like that to modify, this is modify the 0th bit. And after that, you'd be executing store B. STRB R0, R1. This is load, modify, and store. Even if you just want to touch a single bit of the memory location, you have to first use byte access,modified, and then again byte access to store it back. That's a normal method. This is non-atomic.

In bit band method is you just use LDRB, that's it. On a address which is dedicated to this bit. This bit position will have its own address, and by using this address you can uniquely modify or you can instantly modify that bit without affecting any other bits of that memory location. That address is called as alias address.You just have to use the alias address. You need not to do read modify and write as you did in normal method. In bit banding method you just write by using the alias address of that bit position. That means, every bit position is going to have its own alias address. That's what we call as bit banding.

If you open the memory map these bit banding feature is only available for SRAM and for peripheral region. For other memory regions this feature is not applicable. And also in the SRAM only 1MB, the initial 1MB is bit-band region. Other memory locations of the SRAM are not qualified for bit band access. In the peripheral region also only the initial 1MB is qualified for the bit band access. If you take the SRAM here. This is a bit band region the initial 1MB and it has its own bit band alias address. That means, you access bit band region by using bit band alias addresses. Similarly, in the peripheral region you access the bit band region of the peripheral region using the alias address.

If you access this address, it is nothing but you are accessing actually this bit of this memory location, it's like that. And also remember that bit-banding provides atomic operations to bit data. That means, when you use alias address to modify the bit value or if you use the alias address to read a bit value, all those operations are atomic in nature. That means, a those operations will not be interrupted by the system exceptions or interrupts of the processor.
